PACE: Analyze - Understand the Data
This section details the analysis phase of the Automatidata project, focusing on building the DataFrame, inspecting the data, and compiling summary information to inform next steps.

Task 2a. Build dataframe
Create a pandas DataFrame for data learning, and future exploratory data analysis (EDA) and statistical activities.

Code:

import pandas as pd
import numpy as np

# Load dataset into dataframe
df2 = pd.read_csv('2017_Yellow_Taxi_Trip_Data.csv')
print("done")

Task 2b. Understand the data - Inspect the data
View and inspect summary information about the DataFrame.

Code:

df2.head(10)
df2.info()
df2.describe()

Key Findings from Data Inspection:

df.info() Output Observations:

Data Types: Several columns, specifically tpep_pickup_datetime and tpep_dropoff_datetime, are of object (string) dtype, indicating they are not in a numeric or datetime format suitable for direct time-series analysis and will require conversion.

Null Values: All columns show 22699 non-null counts, matching the RangeIndex, which means there are no missing values in the dataset.

Column Naming: The first column (originally unnamed from the CSV) was identified and renamed to 'id' for better clarity and usability.

Other Observations: There's a mix of int64 (7 columns) and float64 (8 columns) dtypes, alongside the object dtypes.

df.describe() Output Observations:

fare_amount: The distribution of fare_amount is noteworthy. The maximum value is significantly high ($999.99), which is much larger than the 25th percentile ($6.50) and 75th percentile ($14.50) range. This suggests the presence of outliers or potentially erroneous entries. Critically, there are negative values for fare_amount (minimum of -120.00), which are illogical for a fare and indicate data quality issues.

trip_distance: Most rides fall within the 1 to 3 miles range (from 25th to 75th percentiles). However, the maximum trip_distance is over 33 miles, which is a substantial outlier compared to the typical trip lengths.

total_amount: Similar to fare_amount, total_amount also exhibits questionable negative values (minimum of -120.30) and a very high maximum (1200.29), indicating potential data anomalies.

passenger_count: The minimum passenger_count is 0, which is unusual for a taxi trip and indicates data quality issues. The maximum is 6, which is plausible.

These initial observations highlight the need for data cleaning and validation before proceeding with in-depth analysis.
